Add ERC: Puppet Proxy Contract (#236)
ethereum/ERCs: ERCS/erc-7613.md

---
eip: 7613
title: Puppet proxy contract
description: The proxy that if called by its deployer, delegates to the address passed to it in the calldata.
author: Igor Żuk (@CodeSandwich)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7613-puppet-proxy-contract/18482
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2024-02-04
---

## Abstract

A puppet is a contract that when called, acts like an empty account, it doesn't do anything and it has no API. The only exception is that if it's called by the address that deployed it, it delegates the call to the address passed to it in calldata. This gives the deployer the ability to execute any logic they want in the context of the puppet.

## Motivation

> A puppet can be used as an alternative account of its deployer. It has a different address, so it has a separate set of asset balances. This enables sophisticated accounting, e.g. each user of a protocol can get their own address where assets can be sent and stored.

Author: ```suggestion
A puppet can be used as an alternative account of its deployer. It has a different address, so it has a separate set of asset balances. This enables sophisticated accounting, e.g. each user of a protocol can get their own address where assets can be sent and stored. The user may call the protocol contract, which in turn will deploy a new puppet and consider it assigned to the user. If the puppet is deployed under a predictable address, e.g. by using the user's address as the CREATE2 salt, the puppet may not even need to be deployed before funds are sent to its address. From now on the protocol will consider all the assets sent to the puppet as owned by the user. If the protocol needs to move the funds out from the puppet address, it can call the puppet ordering it to delegate to a function transferring the assets to arbitrary addresses, or making arbitrary calls triggering approved transfers to other contracts.

Puppets can be used as an alternative to approved transfers when loading funds into the protocol. Any contract and any wallet can transfer the funds to the puppet address assigned to the user without making any approvals or calling the protocol contracts. Funds can be loaded across multiple transactions and potentially from multiple sources. To funnel funds from another protocol, there's no need for integration in the 3rd party contracts as long as they are capable of transferring funds to an arbitrary address. Wallets limited to plain ERC-20 transfers and stripped of any web3 functionality can be used to load funds into the protocol. The users of the fully featured wallets don't need to sign opaque calldata blobs that may be harmful or approve the protocol to take their tokens, they only need to make a transfer, which is a simple process with a familiar UX. When the funds are already stored in the puppet assigned to the user, somebody needs to call the protocol so it's notified that the funds were loaded. Depending on the protocol and its API this call may or may not be permissionless potentially making the UX even more convenient with gasless transactions or 3rd parties covering the gas cost. Some protocols don't need the users to specify what needs to be done with the loaded funds or they allow the users to configure that in advance. Most of the protocols using approved transfers to load funds may benefit from using the puppets.
```

Reviewer: Looks good 🙏

Author: Pushed.

---
eip: 7613

> title: Puppet proxy contract

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Puppet Proxy Contract
```

> description: The proxy that if called by its deployer, delegates to the address passed to it in the calldata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: A proxy that, if called by its deployer, delegates to an implementation specified in calldata.
```

author: Igor Żuk (@CodeSandwich)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7613-puppet-proxy-contract/18482
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2024-02-04
---

## Abstract

> A puppet is a contract that when called, acts like an empty account, it doesn't do anything and it has no API. The only exception is that if it's called by the address that deployed it, it delegates the call to the address passed to it in calldata. This gives the deployer the ability to execute any logic they want in the context of the puppet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A puppet is a contract that, when called, acts like an empty account. It doesn't do anything and it has no API, except when it is called by the address that deployed it. In that case, it delegates the call to the address passed to it in calldata. This gives the deployer the ability to execute any logic they want in the context of the puppet.
```

## Motivation

A puppet can be used as an alternative account of its deployer. It has a different address, so it has a separate set of asset balances. This enables sophisticated accounting, e.g. each user of a protocol can get their own address where assets can be sent and stored. The user may call the protocol contract, which in turn will deploy a new puppet and consider it assigned to the user. If the puppet is deployed under a predictable address, e.g. by using the user's address as the CREATE2 salt, the puppet may not even need to be deployed before funds are sent to its address. From now on the protocol will consider all the assets sent to the puppet as owned by the user. If the protocol needs to move the funds out from the puppet address, it can call the puppet ordering it to delegate to a function transferring the assets to arbitrary addresses, or making arbitrary calls triggering approved transfers to other contracts.

> Puppets can be used as an alternative to approved transfers when loading funds into the protocol. Any contract and any wallet can transfer the funds to the puppet address assigned to the user without making any approvals or calling the protocol contracts. Funds can be loaded across multiple transactions and potentially from multiple sources. To funnel funds from another protocol, there's no need for integration in the 3rd party contracts as long as they are capable of transferring funds to an arbitrary address. Wallets limited to plain ERC-20 transfers and stripped of any web3 functionality can be used to load funds into the protocol. The users of the fully featured wallets don't need to sign opaque calldata blobs that may be harmful or approve the protocol to take their tokens, they only need to make a transfer, which is a simple process with a familiar UX. When the funds are already stored in the puppet assigned to the user, somebody needs to call the protocol so it's notified that the funds were loaded. Depending on the protocol and its API this call may or may not be permissionless potentially making the UX even more convenient with gasless transactions or 3rd parties covering the gas cost. Some protocols don't need the users to specify what needs to be done with the loaded funds or they allow the users to configure that in advance. Most of the protocols using approved transfers to load funds may benefit from using the puppets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Puppets can be used as an alternative to approved transfers when loading funds into the protocol. Any contract and any wallet can transfer the funds to the puppet address assigned to the user without making any approvals or calling the protocol contracts. Funds can be loaded across multiple transactions and potentially from multiple sources. To funnel funds from another protocol, there's no need for integration in the 3rd party contracts as long as they are capable of transferring funds to an arbitrary address. Wallets limited to plain [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) transfers and stripped of any web3 functionality can be used to load funds into the protocol. The users of the fully featured wallets don't need to sign opaque calldata blobs that may be harmful or approve the protocol to take their tokens, they only need to make a transfer, which is a simple process with a familiar UX. When the funds are already stored in the puppet assigned to the user, somebody needs to call the protocol so it's notified that the funds were loaded. Depending on the protocol and its API this call may or may not be permissionless potentially making the UX even more convenient with gasless transactions or 3rd parties covering the gas cost. Some protocols don't need the users to specify what needs to be done with the loaded funds or they allow the users to configure that in advance. Most of the protocols using approved transfers to load funds may benefit from using the puppets.
```

> The puppet's logic doesn't need to be ever upgraded, to change its behavior the deployer needs to change the address it passes to the puppet to delegate to or the calldata it passes for delegation. The entire fleet of puppets deployed by a single contract can be upgraded by upgrading the contract that deployed them, without using beacons. A nice trick is that the deployer can make the puppet delegate to the address holding the deployer's own logic, so the puppet's logic is encapsulated in the deployer's.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The puppet's logic doesn't need to be ever upgraded. To change its behavior the deployer needs to change the address it passes to the puppet to delegate to or the calldata it passes for delegation. The entire fleet of puppets deployed by a single contract can be upgraded by upgrading the contract that deployed them, without using beacons. A nice trick is that the deployer can make the puppet delegate to the address holding the deployer's own logic, so the puppet's logic is encapsulated in the deployer's.
```

// | CALLDATACOPY   | 37            | [payload size] 0 0 0
// Delegate call
// | RETURNDATASIZE | 3D            | 0 [payload size] 0 0 0
// | RETURNDATASIZE | 3D            | 0 0 [payload size] 0 0 0
// | CALLDATALOAD   | 35            | [delegate to] 0 [payload size] 0 0 0
// | GAS            | 5A            | [gas] [delegate to] 0 [payload size] 0 0 0
// | DELEGATECALL   | F4            | [success] 0
// Copy return data
// | RETURNDATASIZE | 3D            | [return size] [success] 0
// | DUP3           | 82            | 0 [return size] [success] 0
// | DUP1           | 80            | 0 0 [return size] [success] 0
// | RETURNDATACOPY | 3E            | [success] 0
// Return
// | SWAP1          | 90            | 0 [success]
// | RETURNDATASIZE | 3D            | [return size] 0 [success]
// | SWAP2          | 91            | [success] 0 [return size]
// | PUSH1          | 60 40         | [success branch] [success] 0 [return size]
// | JUMPI          | 57            | 0 [return size]
// | REVERT         | FD            |
// | JUMPDEST       | 5B            | 0 [return size]
// | RETURN         | F3            |
```

> The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

Reviewer 2: Please move this paragraph to the top of your specification section (if you intend to use these keywords), or remove it entirely (if you don't.)

Author: Moved.

    /// @param salt The salt to use for the deterministic deployment.
    /// @param deployer The address of the deployer of the puppet.
    /// @return predicted The address of the puppet.
    function predictDeterministicAddress(bytes32 salt, address deployer)
        internal
        pure
        returns (address predicted)
    {
        bytes32 hash = keccak256(abi.encodePacked(hex"ff", deployer, salt, CREATION_CODE_HASH));
        return address(uint160(uint256(hash)));
    }

    function delegationCalldata(address delegateTo, bytes memory data)
        internal
        pure
        returns (bytes memory payload)
    {
        return abi.encodePacked(bytes32(uint256(uint160(delegateTo))), data);
    }
}
```

## Security Considerations

The bytecode is made to resemble clone proxy's wherever it makes sense to simplify auditing.

ABI-encoding the delegation address protects the deployer from being tricked by a 3rd party into calling the puppet and making it delegate to an arbitrary address. Such scenario would only be possible if the deployer called on the puppet a function with the selector `0x00000000`, which as of now doesn't come from any reasonably named function.

> Needs discussion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<!-- Needs discussion. -->
```

Use HTML-style comments and the linter will make sure you deal with them.
